[Music]
what are you making little kitty
for that you'll need more than just clay
bye
hmm
that's an excellent question
hey friends in today's episode let us
see the process behind the creation of a
beloved planet and answer a crucial
question
how did the earth form
zoom in
planet earth a giant mass of water and
mud revolving in space and the only
known home sweet home formed just for us
as it gives us food to eat water to
drink and aid to breathe
making it a perfect breeding ground for
life to evolve
but have you ever wondered how did this
giant planet come into existence in the
first place
i'm sure you did so let me tell you this
astonishing story of the earth's
formation
well it all began a long time ago which
is about 15 billion years ago when the
whole universe was inside a tiny bubble
called
the cosmic egg
then about 13.8 billion years ago the
little bald bubble began heating up and
generating energy until it finally
exploded with a bag
today we call this massive explosion the
big bang you can check a video on the
same the link is in the description
then about 4.5 billion years ago when
the universe began to cool down a bit
and settled into its current layout
everything started to spin forming
mighty wind and gravity
and over time
one such gravitational force from the
remnant of a dead star started pulling
the giant dirty gas cloud
this cloud got denser and denser in its
center and formed an accretion disk
then in the next 10 to 20 million years
other small particles of dust rock and
gas started sticking together
creating larger objects
until it became a sphere and large
enough to be called a planet by today's
standard
and young earth was formed
at this point the earth's surface
temperature was a burning mess
with seas of lava and a poisonous
atmosphere
not only that various comets asteroids
and other cosmic elements constantly
attacked it from all sides
making it boil more and more
but soon things took a dramatic turn and
the cosmic attack reduced
and so as the temperature of the earth
cooled down
water from the inside of the earth rose
to the surface
formed steam and rained back on the
ground to form oceans
even other meteors brought more water to
our land in the form of ice
so gradually the earth cooled down and
the surface formed a thin crust
meanwhile the volcanoes on the ocean's
bed blew magma to the top
which eventually cooled down to form
volcanic islands that joined together to
create a single giant continent called
pangaea
and inside the earth the hot rock
continued to move around moving the
crust below and breaking it apart
through a process called plate tectonics
we have a separate video dedicated
wholly to this topic please check the
link below
and as the earth's crust moved around
pangaea broke apart and its pieces
drifted away to create the continents we
see today
and modern earth took its form
a place we all can proudly call
home
trip your time
did you know
april 22nd every year is observed as
earth day
yes it was first organized in 1970 to
promote ecology and raise awareness of
the growing problems of air water and
soil pollution
so
please do your bit and share this video
with friends and family
hope you learned something new in
today's episode until next time it's me
dr binox zooming out
[Music]
ah
never mind
[Music]
oh no little kitty the earth isn't flat
from the top it's all around round and
round
plus a chainsaw isn't a thing to play
with
phew
now let me tell you about the shape of
our earth
hey friends we all know
um
i mean apart from the flat earth
community
we all know that the world is round but
have you ever wondered why
well in today's episode let us go around
this question to find the answer
zoom in
[Music]
if you look at our solar system you will
see planets made of rocks
gas with rings
without them some are small in size
while others are big
one factor common in all is that they
are round shape
yes but the vital question is why is
that and what is the reason behind their
round shape
before we dwell on their shape let us
see when do we call a celestial body a
planet
well according to iau for a celestial
body to be called a planet it needs to
fulfill three essential criteria
first the object should revolve around
the sun
second the object should be spherical
and thirdly the area around its orbit
should be clear and should not have any
equivalent or a bigger celestial body
meaning with the help of its gravity the
planet should clear asteroids and dwarf
planets out of its way
[Music]
so the point number two clearly states
that the planet needs to be round or
spherical
but we don't see any other shape
hovering in space in the first place
isn't it friends
most things we see are round or pretty
close to it including asteroids so
what's going on here
well
the answer is gravity
yes earth and other planets are round
because of the force of gravity that
pulls equally from all sides
gravity pulls from the center to the
edges like the spokes of a bicycle wheel
this makes the overall shape of a planet
round which is a three-dimensional
circle
but planets are not exactly round but
roughly spherical or oblate spheroids
yes if noticed carefully you will see
that the equatorial diameter of the
earth is about 43 kilometers larger than
the polar diameter
this is because
just like a spinning top our earth spins
on its axis with a speed of
1674.4 kilometers per hour
and this much velocity causes the planet
to bulge near the equator due to
centrifugal force as things near it tend
to move away like mud flying off a tire
and it's not just the earth but satin
bulges the most of all the planets in
our solar system
yes if you compare the diameter from
pole to pole to the diameter along the
equator it's not the same
satin is 10.7 percent thicker around the
middle
while jupiter is 6.9 percent thicker
around the middle
so
instead of being round like marbles they
are like basketballs squished down while
someone sits on them
trim your time
did you know earth and mars are small
and don't spin around as fast as the gas
giants like jupiter saturn uranus and
neptune
also jupiter is known to be the fastest
spinning planet in our solar system
hope you learned something new in
today's episode until next time it's me
dr binox zooming out
[Music]
never mind
ah
there is nothing more magical than
seeing the sun go down on the dusky
horizon
it's not the sun that goes anywhere
during the dawn and sunset
but
it's us who move little kitty
kitty's standing still
yes little kitty it may appear like that
and although we might not feel it
our planet is continuously rotating and
revolving on its axes
hey friends so in today's episode let us
debunk the mystery behind our beloved
sun's hiding spot by learning about our
earth's rotational and revolution
movements
zoom in
so
what are earth's rotation and
revolution well
here is a gorgeous illustration of our
planet earth
now imagine a line passing through its
center of mass
this imaginary line is called the axis
and our planet spins around on this
invisible line just like a top
and the circular movement of an object
spinning around its axis is called the
rotation
yes my dear friends and due to this
rotational quality of our planet earth
we witness
day and night
and how is that
well it is because different parts of
the planet are facing towards the sun or
away from it
yes my dear friends
when you are located on the side where
you can see the sun and its light and
heat can reach you
it's day time
and when the earth spins to take you
away from the sight of the sun
where its light and heat can't reach you
anymore
it's night time
and it takes 24 hours for the earth to
turn all the way round to make a single
day
i know you guys must be thinking that if
the rotation of the earth makes a day
then
what makes a year
and the answer to this question is the
revolution
let me explain
you see although the earth is rotating
on its axis at the same time it also
revolves on orbits around the sun which
is called revolution
and one full orbit all the way around
the sun
is one revolution and the earth takes
365 days or precisely 365.24
days to complete a revolution
that makes up a whole year
but don't get confused with the
similarities of the words notation and
revolution my dear friends
in astronomy the word rotation is used
to mean the movement around the axis
which creates the day and night on earth
while revolution is used when one body
moves around another that makes a year
in the case of a planet earth
[Music]
but here is a twist and that twist is in
the axis
as the earth is not sitting with a
straight posture but its axis is
actually a little tilted
yes ions ago
when an object the size of mars crashed
into the newly formed planet earth it
knocked a planet over and left it tilted
at an angle
and this slight tilt made one part of
the earth lean towards the sun while the
other part of it is leaning away
and there is a great significance to
this tilt my dear friends
yes due to this angle the solar energy
reaching different parts of our planet
is not constant but varies during the
year
as at a particular time the northern
hemisphere is leaning towards the sun
while the southern is leaning away
and at other times the southern
hemisphere tilts towards the sun whereas
the northern hemisphere leans away
and this is why we have different
seasons and why the seasons are opposite
in the northern and southern hemispheres
yes the part of the earth leaning
towards the sun causes summer in that
region
and the days are long while the part
leaning away experiences cold climate
with shorter days
so here we go friends now you know the
difference between earth's rotation and
revolution and why they are essential to
make your world go round and round trip
your time
did you know the angle made by the axis
of the earth which is an imaginary line
with the orbital plane is 66 degrees
also it is said that humans have made a
moderate change in the earth's rotation
period by several microseconds by
accumulating vast reservoirs with
trillions of tons of water
[Music]
hope you learned something new in
today's episode until next time it's me
dr binox zooming out
[Music]
oh
never mind
hello friends
the best part of a pizza is its crust
[Music]
yummy
just like this pizza the earth too has a
crust
but with no cheese in it
so let's learn something about the
structure of the earth today it consists
of the crust
mantle and core
zoom in
this is the earth's crust
it consists of all kinds of rocks soil
and everything you see above the earth's
surface
you will be surprised to know that the
crust that is the land on which we walk
is almost three times thicker than the
crust under the oceans
and it extends to about 25 miles
the earth's crust floats on this layer
which is called the mantle
it is made of thick solid rocky
substance and amounts to about 85
percent of the total mass of earth
the first 50 miles of the mantle
consists of very hard rigid rocks
the next 150 miles are made up of super
hot solid rocks below that for the next
several hundred miles the earth's mantle
is believed to be made up of very solid
and sturdy rock materials
the mantle is about 1 800 miles thick
and by far the largest layer of earth
the earth's outer co is made up of super
hot liquid molten substance called
lava
[Music]
this lava is believed to be made of iron
and nickel
it extends to a depth of 3000 miles
beneath the earth's surface
and finally we have reached earth's
inner core
the inner core extends another 900 miles
towards the center of the earth
it is believed that this inner core is a
solid ball made of iron and nickel
trim your time
the crust occupies less than one percent
of earth's volume
the inuko is the hottest part of the
earth and it is as hot as the surface of
the sun
surprising isn't it
looks like it's time for me to zoom out
before i get baked in this heat tune in
next time for more fun facts
[Music]
what doctor painting
the highest landform in the world little
kitty
yes little kitty hey friends in today's
episode let me take you around the globe
to witness the natural beauty our earth
is blessed with known as the landforms
and briefly explore the exciting
formation process with stunning graphics
from our creative team
zoom in
so
what are the landforms of the earth
just like all living beings have certain
physical features that distinguish them
from each other
similarly the planet earth is made up of
various unique features and
characteristics we call landforms
yes my friends the landform is the
natural geographical of physical
features of the earth that are
classified into various types such as
mountains hills
valleys plateaus planes etc
but before we shed some light on these
types of landforms let us briefly
examine the process leading to the
formation of these features
first comes the external process in
which external factors such as wind and
brain shapes the earth's surface by
erosion and deposition
yes erosion is a process in which
sediments get deposited in a different
location
whereas sediments are the materials on
the earth's surface such as soil and
rocks
next comes the internal process
and as the name suggests
it is the process that occurs inside the
earth's surface
such as plate tectonics and volcano
eruptions
these occur because of the extreme heat
in the earth's core
causing the molten rock in the mantle
layer to move as a result
causing uneven movement on the surface
these layers are either uplifting or
sinking forming different types of
landforms that can be categorized into
mountains plateaus and plains
so let us explore these major types of
landforms starting from the mighty
mountains
mountains are landforms higher and
steeper than the surrounding areas
in general the mountains are higher than
200 feet and divided into three
categories
fold
block and volcanic
yes
when two tectonic plates collide and the
edges of these plates fold
because of the tremendous force between
them
it creates the fold mountains
on the other hand the block mountains
form when large areas are broken and
displaced vertically
these large areas of rock sometimes
stretching across hundreds of kilometers
are created by tectonic and localized
stresses in the earth's crust
and the third type of mountains are the
volcanic mountains that are formed due
to the magna flowing up from the mantle
to the crust of the earth
next comes the planes
most of the earth's surface consists of
low and high planes that are flat or the
low relief areas on the surface of the
earth
these are the most fertile region of the
planet
and are the most suitable for human
habitation and agriculture activities
like farming and poultry
it might be formed as a result of the
sedimentation of eroded soil from the
top of the hills and mountains or due to
flowing lava deposited by the agents of
wind
water
and ice
now let us look at the landform we call
plateaus
a plateau is a flat elevated landform
that rises sharply above the surrounding
area on at least one side
plateaus occur on every continent and
take up a third of the earth's land and
are divided into two categories
dissected plateaus and volcanic plateaus
a dissected plateau forms due to the
upward movement in the earth's crust
caused by the slow collision of tectonic
plates
whereas a volcanic plateau is formed by
numerous small volcanic eruptions that
slowly build up over time creating a
plateau from the resulting lava flows
and the fourth major type of landform is
the ecological landscape known as the
deserts
it is a dry piece of land with little or
no vegetation due to lack of rainfall
in deserts the atmospheric air is arid
and the daytime temperature is high the
process by which fertile land becomes
desert is called desertification
you won't believe but human activities
are a primary cause of desertification
yes these activities include overgrazing
of livestock
deforestation over cultivation of
farmland and poor irrigation practices
overgrazing and deforestation remove
plants that anchor the soil
as a result wind and water erode the
nutrient-rich top soil
also hooves from feeding livestock
compact the soil preventing it from
absorbing water and fertilizers
trim your time
did you know the largest plateau in the
world is the tibetan plateau located in
central asia
yes it stretches through the countries
of tibet china and india and occupies an
area of 2.5 million square kilometers
also landforms can exist underwater in
the form of mountain ranges and basins
under the sea the mariana trench the
deepest landform on earth is in the
south pacific ocean
hope you learned something new in
today's episode until next time it's me
dr bynox zooming out
and the painting is done
[Music]
ah
never mind
hey kitty look a 17 year old intern at
nasa has discovered a new earth-like
planet isn't that brilliant
i understand your curiosity kitty but
one day we might be able to settle on a
different planet
but it's possible only if the new world
has all the four major domains of earth
present on it
it's domains kitty
hey friends it is rightly said that
heaven is under our feet and over our
heads but no wonder we fail to
acknowledge it
so in today's episode let me tell you
about those four major domains of the
earth that make our earth indeed a
heaven
zoom in
so
what are the four domains of earth
the massive universe formed millions of
years ago has infinite undiscovered
spaces trillions of stars millions of
galaxies and the nine planets in our
solar system
but the universe blessed planet earth
with living beings
and to make life possible three
different components meet so humans can
survive and thrive
these are the elements of land water and
air
these are nothing but the domains of the
earth namely the lithosphere hydrosphere
and atmosphere
which give rise to the biosphere
let's have a good look at each of them
starting with the lithosphere and to
know about it let's speak a little
beneath the earth's surface
as you can see it is made up of various
layers out of which the crust and the
upper layer of the mantle
make the lithosphere
which is basically the solid portion of
the earth
the lithosphere is further divided into
two parts the continental crust which is
the thick part of the earth's crust
which forms the large land masses and
the oceanic crust
that could be found deep under the ocean
and seas
which are denser than the continental
crust
now let us move further to learn about
the hydrosphere
[Music]
you see
although the earth seems hot and burning
from inside but when you look at it from
space you'll see one soothing cool
planet due to its blue shade as around
71 percent of the earth's surface is
covered by water and this water covered
area is called the hydrosphere
this 71
of the water
is found in three different forms that
is
water located in a liquid state into the
water bodies such as
oceans seas lakes ponds etc
in a solid state such as ice and gaseous
state such as water vapor
but always remember that out of the 71
of available water only 2.5
is consumable by humans so it is
advisable that you consume water wisely
and do not waste or contaminate it
now let us move further and look at the
sky
i know you feel that the area between
the surface of the earth and space is a
vacuum or there is nothing in between
but let me inform you that a lot is
happening there as it is covered with a
set of layers of gases we call the
atmosphere that surrounds the earth
this invisible shield of gas performs
various duties like keeping us warm
providing the oxygen
and it is where the weather changes
the atmosphere is further composed of
different layers and each layer has its
prominence
the first layer is the troposphere
the lowest layer of atmosphere
that ranges up to five to nine miles
above the earth's surface and is denser
than other layers
the troposphere is where all of earth's
weather occurs and contains
approximately eighty percent of the
total mass of the atmosphere
now as we move ahead up to 31 miles from
the earth's surface
we enter the stratosphere
this vital layer absorbs harmful uv rays
coming from the sun towards the earth
with the help of the ozone layer present
in it
the next layer is mesosphere
where meteors rushing with a high speed
gets burnt up
and after that comes the thermosphere
where the solar radiations are absorbed
and you can witness the aurora in the
same layer
and the last layer is exosphere
which meets space
now coming back to the fourth domain of
earth that brings all the elements such
as land
water and air together
is our last sphere
the biosphere
the biosphere represents every part of
earth where living organisms are found
that could be commonly divided into two
main parts
the plant kingdom and the animal kingdom
this fear ranges from the vast sky to
the base of the enormous water bodies
such as oceans
it is believed to be formed millions of
years ago
where the first living organism to be
created was bacteria
so here we go friends
these are the four domains of the earth
we need to survive and thrive on this
vast universe
and the earth is the only planet to be
blessed with it
so
cherish it
nourish it and make sure
not to do anything to perish it because
this is the only home we have our
beloved planet earth
trip your time
did you know scientists claim that the
earth is approximately 3.7 billion years
old which also makes the biosphere to be
almost the same age
also researchers say that the depth of
the biosphere is complicated to measure
as there are fish known to be living as
deep as 8
372 meters in the puerto rico trench
hope you learned something new in
today's episode until next time it's me
dr bynox
zooming out
[Music]
ah never mind